*What is Partitioning vs Bucketing in Apache Hive? (Partitioning vs Bucketing)
>Apache Hive is one of the popular data warehouses in distributed cluster environment. 
Apache hive is used to store massive amounts of data and it can be processed in a fast,
parallel, and efficient manner in HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System) environment. 
To improve access time of Hive queries, Hive tables can be stored in diverse ways. 
Hive tables can be stored as partitions and bucketing.

Hive is an excellent tool for performing queries on large datasets. 
There are some instances where we want to filter the data on specific column values. 
In such cases, partitioning and bucketing play a vital role in improving the query performance / access time in Hive. 
We can improve query retrieval time using partitioning and bucketing appropriately. 

At a conceptual level, partitioning is a technique to divide the large table (in hive warehouse) 
into smaller tables based on the distinct values of a specified column 
(one partition for each distinct values) whereas bucketing is a way to split the data based 
on a hash function in a manageable table (user can specify how many buckets he/she wants). 

*What is Partitioning in Hive table? 

Partitioning is a technique of managing the data load horizontally into more manageable 
way by diving data into directories and sub-directories. It allows us to categorize data in 
more logical manner. In hive partition is of two types: 

1)Static partition (managed by user): In Static Partitioning, you need to specify the 
partition (the segment column) in which we want to load the data. In static partitioning, 
the user takes care of everything from defining partitioning column to 
loading data into the partition folders / directories. For example, run following 
command to create static partition and load data:  

> create table employees(id int, name string, branch string) partitioned by 
(gpa float) row format delimited fields terminated by ',';

>insert overwrite table employees partition (gpa = 7.0) select id,name, 
branch from employees where gpa = 7.0;

Now you can run the following query to fetch data from a specified partition. 
So, rather than scanning entre data, the query will scan data from the partition 
which meets the criteria set in the where clause. It will improve query execution time. 

>select * from student_detail_static_part where gpa =7.0;

2)Dynamic Partition (managed by Hive): In dynamic partitioning, the user is required to 
just state the column name on which partition is to be created. 
The hive will automatically create partition based on the unique values in the column on 
which partition is defined while data load operation happens. In dynamic partitioning, 
hive will control the partitioning operation and will figure out unique values in the partitioning column 
and segregate data int the respective partitions. So, no user intervention is required in 
dynamic partitioning. For example,

>create table employees_detail_dynamic_partition(id int, name string, branch string) 
partitioned by (gpa float) row format delimited fields terminated by ',';

>set hive.exec.dynamic.partition = true;

>set hive.exec.dynamic.partition.mode = nonstrict;

>insert overwrite table student_detail_dynamic_partition partition(gpa) 
select id, name, gpa from student_detail;

So, you can see above, hive has created partitions based on the distinct values in the gpa column 
and data is loaded in the respective sub-directories of student_detail_dynamic_partition directory.

*What is bucketing in Hive?
Bucketing is like partitioning with some differences. In bucketing, Hive splits the 
data into a fixed number of buckets, according to a hash function over some set of columns. 
Hive ensures that all rows that have the same hash will store in the same bucket. 
However, a single bucket may contain multiple such groups. For example,

> create table student_detail_bucket(id int, name string, branch string, gpa float) 
clustered by (gpa) into 2 buckets;

from student_detail insert overwrite table student_detail_bucket select id, name, branch, gpa;

The above code will create two buckets (two sub-directories) under student_detail_bucket 
directory and data are segmented in each sub-directory in accordance with hash function. See below,

*When to use partitioning in Hive?
When you have a smaller number of distinct values in a column (a column has low cardinality), 
you should use partitioning. Partitioning (dynamic partitioning on the column) will 
create the number of partitions (sub-directories) equivalent to number of distinct values 
in the column. It will enhance query response time because the query will filter data from the 
sub-directory which match in the where clause rather than scanning full table.

If a column has high cardinality, too many partitions will create too many 
sub-folders/sub-directories in a table folder/directory which will create overhead to NameNode. 
Because NameNode keeps all metadata for the file system in memory. So, be cautious.

*When to use bucketing in Hive?
Partitioning is not recommended in case of a column has high cardinality because 
too many partitions (sub-directories) will be created. In other words, in a case of a column has 
high cardinality, bucketing is preferred. While you make bucketing in hive, you need to specify 
the number of buckets to manage your data efficiently and hash function will put data 
in the appropriate bucket. For example, the salary column in a table which has extremely high cardinality, 
can be placed in 5 buckets using hash function.

*Conclusion
In the above discussion, it is clearly stated what is partitioning and what is bucketing. 
Partitioning and bucketing are used to improve query execution time/ query optimization. 
Partitioning is used in case of a column has low cardinality (a smaller number of distinct values in the column). 
On the other hand, if a column has extremely high cardinality (a greater number of distinct values in the column) 
go for bucketing.



